---
title: Me
---

Personal details
==

My name is Troels Henriksen, I'm a hacker from Denmark.  Computer
science is my greatest passion, and I study it at home as well as at
the [University of Copenhagen](http://diku.dk).

My email address is <athas@sigkill.dk> and my public key is available
[here](pubkey.asc).

I care a lot about free software, and I believe that the right to
inspect the software that administers an increasing part of our
society is of critical importance to the future.  In my mind, there is
little difference between secret source code and secret laws, and both
are black marks on the society that harbors them.  I am not, however,
militant in my beliefs, and I see little value in endless bickering,
so I mostly exercise my beliefs through writing of free code as my
own, as well as refusing to run non-free code on my own systems.

I am also highly idealistic about technical matters, and the
construction of this web site used to be an investigation into the
feasibility of the Unix "tools" approach, in which simple and highly
specialised programs are glued together (usually with shell script) to
achieve the desired functionality.  I am mostly interested in this
approach because it promises great robustness due to the simplicity of
the resulting component programs; simplicity having long been seen as
the key to reliable engineering outside as well as inside the
computing industry.  After much experimentation, I no longer think
current shell scripting is appropriate for anything other than very
simple glue, but perhaps a more effective language for program
composition could be devised.
